src/notes/Bible/Romans.md, before:

---
title: 'Romans'
description: 'Romans Questions'
author: 'Ryan Garant'
---

<article id="ch7">

## Chapter 7

> I hope that we are beginning to see just how much God is concerned about "sin". He loves us but hates our sin. Sometimes, I use the example of a "skunk" coming into a fonnal banquet as the same type of offensiveness as an unbeliever thinking that he could enter heaven. Cany out the skunk example as it could relate to this passage on sin, the law, death, etc. Explain verse 12, relabeling the nouns to fit our skunk example.

- The part about skunks that really urks people is it’s smell. It’s not that it isn’t cute or that it’s simply an animal why it wouldn’t be allowed at a formal banquet. I mean people are totally fine with dogs and these days I wouldn’t be surprised to see those at a formal banquet ha! Just as the banquet is pristine, high quality, and has the best of the best cutlery, plating, atmosphere, so heaven is absolutely pristine, infinitely greater than the greatest banquet hall. Our sin is a foul stench, far worse than that of a skunk, that is inaddmissable in heaven. Just as the skunk is in bondage to it’s nature which is to spray profuse smelling sulfuric acid so we are in bondage to our sinful nature which leads to hell. It is only through Jesus that we can be freed from the law that leads to death. The only way that skunk could get into the banquet hall is if it was given a new nature. We need the same thing.

- To those who are perishing, we are a dreadful smell of death and doom. But to those who are being saved, we are a life-giving perfume. And who is adequate for such a task as this? 2 Cor 2:16

#### Verses about Christ In Us:

- 2 cor 13:5
- Ro 8:10
- 2 cor 4:6-7
- Gal 1:15-16
- Gal 2:20
- Gal 4:19
- Eph 3:17
- Col 1:27
- 2 thes 1:10
- 1 Cor 6:17

> The law of God is not the enemy of man but the sin that dwells within man. What would be the purpose of "sin through the commandment might become exceedingly sinful"? How could sin become extremely sinful? Is this one reason that God doesn't intervene in cases of sin ... that it might become more sinful? Use other Scripture to support your view.

“Sin might be shown to be sin” phainō: another shade of meaning is shine; to give light

- In other words the light of the law will expose sin for what it really is--outright rebellion against God Himself

“Beyond measure” ὑπερβολή hyperbolē: extraordinary degree

- This word continues to build up the the plot that the distance between us and God is a Grand Canyon sized gulf

The idea then is to show us that indeed we have not only fallen just a wee bit short of God’s standard or missed the mark by a couple inches. We have not lived us to who God created us to be (that is we have fallen short of His glory Ro 3:23). The light of the Law shows us that we have fallen to tremendous lengths & that there is a Grand Canyon sized gulf between us and God. Bring up the deep space analogy. It looks small but it is huge.

A purpose could be to show us the bad news, that currently we are separated so far from God farther than the reaches of our minds can fathom. and don’t have the tools, or the ability, or the desire event to build a bridge over that gulf. The law shines a light on our dilemna that we are currently separated from God now and for all eternity.

Then the Law of Liberty swoops in to show us that yes the wages of sin are death Ro. 6:23, but our solution to bridge this chasm is actually a free gift and there is nothing we can do to earn it.  And that knowledge can lead us to surrender at the foot of the cross recognizing that Jesus has already built this bridge by His blood. He has made the way for us. And if we confess with our mouths that Jesus is Lord & that God raised Him from the dead, we will indeed be saved from the doom before us.

Verses 14-25 have thrown some Bible expositors off the track because they think that this section could not be describing a true believer, but an unsaved individual. The reason they proport this seems to come from the beliefthat a believer's heart has been delivered from sinfulness. The rest of our study will be based upon what Paul is really saying. Read Gal. 5: 16, 17 and tell what these verses mean.

Is this section referring to believers pre conversion?

Arg for: NAC

Paul confessed that he was “sold as a slave to sin” (v. 14). He knew that “nothing good lives in \[him\]” (v. 18). He was a “prisoner of the law of sin” (v. 23), a “wretched man” who called out for someone to “rescue \[him\] from this body of death” (v. 24). Are confessions like these what we would expect from the very apostle who said, “Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ” (1 Cor 11:1)?

In the former Paul was a wretched man crying out for deliverance (7:24); in the latter he had been “set free from the law of sin and death” (8:2) and was controlled by the indwelling Spirit of God (8:9).

This “law” (read “principle”) is the propensity toward sin that arises from a person’s lower nature. So what I am by nature is in constant conflict with what I aspire to be as a child of God in whom the Spirit of God dwells.﻿﻿ That conflict will never be settled until, seeing God, we shall be like him (1 John 3:2).

- In my analysis of this is that it is reading into the text given that all the verbs that Paul are present tense
- So textually it does not fly

18 “For I have the desire to do what is right, but not the ability to carry it out.”

My thought process revolves around the word desire.

- Unbelievers do not have the desire nor the ability to walk in righteousness
- Interpreting Galatians, no Spirit no tension between right & wrong
- When I sin I hate that!
- Before Christ I did not hate my sin
- Distinguish conscience
- Further illuminated by Ro. below

Ro. 1:10 - what we are left to our flesh without the Spirit

> None is righteous, no, not one;
> 11  no one understands;
> no one seeks for God.
> 12  All have turned aside; together they have become worthless;
> no one does good,
> not even one.”

[25](http://biblehub.com/galatians/5-25.htm) Gal: If we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit.

- Clarifies this **battle**, when Paul did not keep in step with the Spirit

  - Did what he did not want to do (grieving)
  - Didn’t do what he wanted to do (quenching)

- Paul was a mere man and only powerful insofar as that he stayed in step with the Spirit

- Practically then when I spend time doing these things it is easier to stay in step with the Spirit or being sensitive to the spirit:
  - Prayer
  - Soaking mind in the Word
  - Fellowshipping with believers
  - Thanking God throughout the day

> If you believe that these verses describe a believer, is Paul speaking of his _own heart or of believers in general_?

- vs 1-4 he is speaking to His brothers in Christ evidenced by the fact that they have died to sin.
- But vs 7-25 he switches to using the first person. So grammatically he is speaking about his own heart.
- However, in Ro. 6:7 Paul says that if anyone has **died to sin they are free from it.**
- Pretty much all of Romans 6 is about being dead to sin and alive in Christ
  - He says we are free from the dominion of sin but he doesn't say we are free from struggling with it
  - Ro 7 is his discussion about the struggle with it
  - So then this section can be _applied_ to **all believers**

> In vs 14 is Paul saying his heart is carnal? What does Carnal mean? Is Paul saying he is still in the flesh?

- The Greek word for carnal here is: `σάρκινος` "sarkinos"

  - Other shades of meaning of this word are:
    - material
    - physical
    - human
    - fleshly
    - (merely) human,
  - Used 4 times in NT
    - _2 Cor 3:3_ (Paul asking a rhetorical question if they need a letter of recommendation says the church is their letter of recommendation. And that letter is)...written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of **human** hearts.
    - _Heb 7:16_ (comparing Jesus to Melchizedek) who has become a priest, not on the basis of a legal requirement concerning **bodily** descent, but by the power of an indestructible life.
    - _1 Co 3:1_ But I, brothers, could not address you as spiritual people, but as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ. 2 I fed you with milk, not solid food, for you were not ready for it. And even now you are not yet ready, 3 for you are still of the flesh. For while there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not of the flesh and behaving only in a human way? 4 For when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” are you not being merely human?

- The text is NOT SAYING that he is **totally** carnal but there is indeed a **degree of carnality** to his walk--that is he is still falling into sin. He is doing what he doesn't want to do. He is not doin what he wants to do

  - But we know that Paul doesn't leave it there.
  - He goes on to detail that we know have the power choose righteousness by relying on **Christ's strength**
  - To go further, he goes on later to talk about the process of **sanctification** especially in Ro. 12:2
    - Or put in the light of this text, the process of reducing his carnality and increasing his Christlikeness
    - So yes Paul and us will be in the flesh to some extent (hopefully less and less), until one day when we see Christ face to face and will be pure as he is pure

- NAC: Recognition of our inability to live up to our deepest spiritual longings (chap. 7) leads us to cast ourselves upon God’s Spirit for power and victory (chap. 8). Failure to continue in reliance upon the power of the Spirit places us once again in a position inviting defeat. Sanctification is a gradual process that repeatedly takes the believer through this recurring sequence of failure through dependency upon self to triumph through the indwelling Spirit.

> Explain what sold under sin means

- using a metaphor of slavery
- acting in the way that Paul is: doing the things he despises.

### verse 17

> In verse 17, is Paul avoiding personal responsibility for his sin by claiming that the sin is doing the sinning?

- Paul is **not avoiding** personal responsibility but trying to emphasize how sin's lingering effects still swayed him though he desired to carry out the Law of God.
- lean on your own strength => you fall => God picks you up tells you to rely on his strength by the Holy Spirit
- "The real him" doesn't want to do what his flesh wants to do
  - That's not who he is anymore
    - he has been given a new heart

> Discuss the possibility that Paul is embracing the Gnosticism or Greek dualism of his day.
> Explain its meaning and how Paul could apply this concept.

- **Gnosticism**: spirit (good), matter (bad)
  - Their practical conclusion from that is whatever done in the body even the most messed up sin is of no consequence because real life is in the spiritual realm
  - Also believe that they have a higher knowledge than others and have achieved a higher plane of existence (sounds like Scientology)
- That being said there is a hint of truth to dualism
  - Although the flesh is indeed sinful, we know that we will be given glorified bodies in heaven where there will be no more sin
  - We know there are amazing things in the spiritual realm but also a great spiritual war raging between good and evil beings
- Paul was not espousing Gnosticism or dualism because in the previous ch he says that salvation is a **free gift** of God
  - Not by attaining a higher plane of existence

### verse 23

> What is the "law in my members" warring against the "law of my mind"?
> Is Paul saying that the flesh and the mind are divided against each other?

- The way I took this question is what is the tension about between law of members and mind?
  - **law of mind**: rational thought or reason as it relates to doing God's Law capital L
  - **law of flesh**: propensity to sin
  - What I aspire to be as a child of God who loves Him & others is at war with my desire to love & please my self
  - It's a war of **pleasure**
  - The war is about pleasing self vs pleasing God
  - Those two things are mutually exclusive when they become the primary aim
  - I don't think this conflict will be resolved until we see God face to face and will be pure as He is pure
    - 1 Jn 3:2-3
  - Or put another way, his lower level nature to please self constantly battles with his higher level new nature
  - I am starting to see this picture of a born again believer, who delights in the Law of God, crying out for deliverance because he knows that left to himself he is stuck.
    - He can't do what he want's to do.
    - He recognizes though, that his **only hope is in Jesus** death on His behalf that can free his to live out his new nature
    - I keep going back to 1 Jn 3:3
      - "And everyone who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure."

> As Jesus said before, how can a house divided against itself continue to stand? (Luke 11:17)

- Not sure how this relates

> Was Paul more sinful than we are?

- If it's a matter of comparing where I am right now in my walk to where he was as he was writing this letter then I would be the more sinful one no question.

### verse 24

> With what insight does Paul conclude the chapter?
> There may be more than one ... so mention what you see.

- Paul is saying that he is **desperately wicked** & **incapable of carrying out God's Law**, which if left unfixed, will lead to an eternal **death**.
  - In other words he is hopeless and his only hope for eternal life is Christ who can carry out the Law perfectly on his behalf.
  - It is also Christ who can **continually free him** to from his fleshly desires to sin to actually carry out the righteousness he so desires to do

> What does verse 24 have in common with Luke 5:8 and with Isaiah 6:5?

- Paul, Peter & Isaiah all recognize that God is supremely **holy**, that they are **wicked**, and that God does not abide with **unholiness**.

> How does this apply to your life and mine? Discuss.

- The one thing that has been impressed upon me is the need to rely upon Christ's strength & liberating power moment by moment

</article>

<article id="ch8">

## Chapter 8

> Explain the term "no condemnation" in verse 1.

- Paul progress his thoughts that he has been developing earlier
- Ro. 5:18 "_Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men._"
- Ro. 7:6 "_But now we are released from the law, having died to that which held us captive, so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit and not in the old way of the written code._"
- **_No condemnation_**
  - or penalty from God's judgment because He is the one of _justifies & condemns_ (v. 3-34)
  - _Paraphrase_: We **will not be sentenced by the Judge** with the punishment we deserve for not upholding the Law
- An interesting practical thought developed by NAC, is that wallowing in guilt and not moving past it, is a form of trying to pay for our sentence which has already been fully paid for by Christ

> Is it possible for a true Christian to so offend God, after having being forgiven, that he loses his salvation?

- It brings me great **hope**, **quiets** my soul, and **humbles** me to know that God predestined me to salvation knowing who I would be before & after conversion
  - Knowing all the sin I would commit
  - Knowing all the times I would rebel
  - Knowing my innermost thoughts, desires & intentions
- And that He would hold me so tight knowing all that
  - so much so that nothing in all of creation could separate me from His love...even myself or my own sin
- This doesn't give me a **license to sin** but a **license to hope**
- Praise God that salvation rests on Christ's strength and not my own!

> What does it mean to be a "true Christian"?

- I guess you can take this question in a few directions
- The angle I approached it from was Galatians 5...fruit of the Spirit
  - If you have the **Spirit of God** residing in you, you are a true Christian
  - v 14 "_For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God._"

> Discuss the possibilities of condemnation for future sin, using other Scripture.

- I know of no Scripture that speaks to eternal condemnation (_that is going to Hell_) for future sins
- The only one that I know of that comes close is a present sin which is blaspheming the Holy Spirit
  - And if you have the Holy Spirit residing in you, you cannot do that.

</article>

Commit message:

notes on Romans 8 The Spirit in the life of believer

src/notes/Bible/Romans.md, after:

---
title: 'Romans'
description: 'Romans Questions'
author: 'Ryan Garant'
---

<article id="ch7">

## Chapter 7

> I hope that we are beginning to see just how much God is concerned about "sin". He loves us but hates our sin. Sometimes, I use the example of a "skunk" coming into a fonnal banquet as the same type of offensiveness as an unbeliever thinking that he could enter heaven. Cany out the skunk example as it could relate to this passage on sin, the law, death, etc. Explain verse 12, relabeling the nouns to fit our skunk example.

- The part about skunks that really urks people is it’s smell. It’s not that it isn’t cute or that it’s simply an animal why it wouldn’t be allowed at a formal banquet. I mean people are totally fine with dogs and these days I wouldn’t be surprised to see those at a formal banquet ha! Just as the banquet is pristine, high quality, and has the best of the best cutlery, plating, atmosphere, so heaven is absolutely pristine, infinitely greater than the greatest banquet hall. Our sin is a foul stench, far worse than that of a skunk, that is inaddmissable in heaven. Just as the skunk is in bondage to it’s nature which is to spray profuse smelling sulfuric acid so we are in bondage to our sinful nature which leads to hell. It is only through Jesus that we can be freed from the law that leads to death. The only way that skunk could get into the banquet hall is if it was given a new nature. We need the same thing.

- To those who are perishing, we are a dreadful smell of death and doom. But to those who are being saved, we are a life-giving perfume. And who is adequate for such a task as this? 2 Cor 2:16

#### Verses about Christ In Us:

- 2 cor 13:5
- Ro 8:10
- 2 cor 4:6-7
- Gal 1:15-16
- Gal 2:20
- Gal 4:19
- Eph 3:17
- Col 1:27
- 2 thes 1:10
- 1 Cor 6:17

> The law of God is not the enemy of man but the sin that dwells within man. What would be the purpose of "sin through the commandment might become exceedingly sinful"? How could sin become extremely sinful? Is this one reason that God doesn't intervene in cases of sin ... that it might become more sinful? Use other Scripture to support your view.

“Sin might be shown to be sin” phainō: another shade of meaning is shine; to give light

- In other words the light of the law will expose sin for what it really is--outright rebellion against God Himself

“Beyond measure” ὑπερβολή hyperbolē: extraordinary degree

- This word continues to build up the the plot that the distance between us and God is a Grand Canyon sized gulf

The idea then is to show us that indeed we have not only fallen just a wee bit short of God’s standard or missed the mark by a couple inches. We have not lived us to who God created us to be (that is we have fallen short of His glory Ro 3:23). The light of the Law shows us that we have fallen to tremendous lengths & that there is a Grand Canyon sized gulf between us and God. Bring up the deep space analogy. It looks small but it is huge.

A purpose could be to show us the bad news, that currently we are separated so far from God farther than the reaches of our minds can fathom. and don’t have the tools, or the ability, or the desire event to build a bridge over that gulf. The law shines a light on our dilemna that we are currently separated from God now and for all eternity.

Then the Law of Liberty swoops in to show us that yes the wages of sin are death Ro. 6:23, but our solution to bridge this chasm is actually a free gift and there is nothing we can do to earn it.  And that knowledge can lead us to surrender at the foot of the cross recognizing that Jesus has already built this bridge by His blood. He has made the way for us. And if we confess with our mouths that Jesus is Lord & that God raised Him from the dead, we will indeed be saved from the doom before us.

Verses 14-25 have thrown some Bible expositors off the track because they think that this section could not be describing a true believer, but an unsaved individual. The reason they proport this seems to come from the beliefthat a believer's heart has been delivered from sinfulness. The rest of our study will be based upon what Paul is really saying. Read Gal. 5: 16, 17 and tell what these verses mean.

Is this section referring to believers pre conversion?

Arg for: NAC

Paul confessed that he was “sold as a slave to sin” (v. 14). He knew that “nothing good lives in \[him\]” (v. 18). He was a “prisoner of the law of sin” (v. 23), a “wretched man” who called out for someone to “rescue \[him\] from this body of death” (v. 24). Are confessions like these what we would expect from the very apostle who said, “Follow my example, as I follow the example of Christ” (1 Cor 11:1)?

In the former Paul was a wretched man crying out for deliverance (7:24); in the latter he had been “set free from the law of sin and death” (8:2) and was controlled by the indwelling Spirit of God (8:9).

This “law” (read “principle”) is the propensity toward sin that arises from a person’s lower nature. So what I am by nature is in constant conflict with what I aspire to be as a child of God in whom the Spirit of God dwells.﻿﻿ That conflict will never be settled until, seeing God, we shall be like him (1 John 3:2).

- In my analysis of this is that it is reading into the text given that all the verbs that Paul are present tense
- So textually it does not fly

18 “For I have the desire to do what is right, but not the ability to carry it out.”

My thought process revolves around the word desire.

- Unbelievers do not have the desire nor the ability to walk in righteousness
- Interpreting Galatians, no Spirit no tension between right & wrong
- When I sin I hate that!
- Before Christ I did not hate my sin
- Distinguish conscience
- Further illuminated by Ro. below

Ro. 1:10 - what we are left to our flesh without the Spirit

> None is righteous, no, not one;
> 11  no one understands;
> no one seeks for God.
> 12  All have turned aside; together they have become worthless;
> no one does good,
> not even one.”

[25](http://biblehub.com/galatians/5-25.htm) Gal: If we live by the Spirit, let us also keep in step with the Spirit.

- Clarifies this **battle**, when Paul did not keep in step with the Spirit

  - Did what he did not want to do (grieving)
  - Didn’t do what he wanted to do (quenching)

- Paul was a mere man and only powerful insofar as that he stayed in step with the Spirit

- Practically then when I spend time doing these things it is easier to stay in step with the Spirit or being sensitive to the spirit:
  - Prayer
  - Soaking mind in the Word
  - Fellowshipping with believers
  - Thanking God throughout the day

> If you believe that these verses describe a believer, is Paul speaking of his _own heart or of believers in general_?

- vs 1-4 he is speaking to His brothers in Christ evidenced by the fact that they have died to sin.
- But vs 7-25 he switches to using the first person. So grammatically he is speaking about his own heart.
- However, in Ro. 6:7 Paul says that if anyone has **died to sin they are free from it.**
- Pretty much all of Romans 6 is about being dead to sin and alive in Christ
  - He says we are free from the dominion of sin but he doesn't say we are free from struggling with it
  - Ro 7 is his discussion about the struggle with it
  - So then this section can be _applied_ to **all believers**

> In vs 14 is Paul saying his heart is carnal? What does Carnal mean? Is Paul saying he is still in the flesh?

- The Greek word for carnal here is: `σάρκινος` "sarkinos"

  - Other shades of meaning of this word are:
    - material
    - physical
    - human
    - fleshly
    - (merely) human,
  - Used 4 times in NT
    - _2 Cor 3:3_ (Paul asking a rhetorical question if they need a letter of recommendation says the church is their letter of recommendation. And that letter is)...written not with ink but with the Spirit of the living God, not on tablets of stone but on tablets of **human** hearts.
    - _Heb 7:16_ (comparing Jesus to Melchizedek) who has become a priest, not on the basis of a legal requirement concerning **bodily** descent, but by the power of an indestructible life.
    - _1 Co 3:1_ But I, brothers, could not address you as spiritual people, but as people of the flesh, as infants in Christ. 2 I fed you with milk, not solid food, for you were not ready for it. And even now you are not yet ready, 3 for you are still of the flesh. For while there is jealousy and strife among you, are you not of the flesh and behaving only in a human way? 4 For when one says, “I follow Paul,” and another, “I follow Apollos,” are you not being merely human?

- The text is NOT SAYING that he is **totally** carnal but there is indeed a **degree of carnality** to his walk--that is he is still falling into sin. He is doing what he doesn't want to do. He is not doin what he wants to do

  - But we know that Paul doesn't leave it there.
  - He goes on to detail that we know have the power choose righteousness by relying on **Christ's strength**
  - To go further, he goes on later to talk about the process of **sanctification** especially in Ro. 12:2
    - Or put in the light of this text, the process of reducing his carnality and increasing his Christlikeness
    - So yes Paul and us will be in the flesh to some extent (hopefully less and less), until one day when we see Christ face to face and will be pure as he is pure

- NAC: Recognition of our inability to live up to our deepest spiritual longings (chap. 7) leads us to cast ourselves upon God’s Spirit for power and victory (chap. 8). Failure to continue in reliance upon the power of the Spirit places us once again in a position inviting defeat. Sanctification is a gradual process that repeatedly takes the believer through this recurring sequence of failure through dependency upon self to triumph through the indwelling Spirit.

> Explain what sold under sin means

- using a metaphor of slavery
- acting in the way that Paul is: doing the things he despises.

### verse 17

> In verse 17, is Paul avoiding personal responsibility for his sin by claiming that the sin is doing the sinning?

- Paul is **not avoiding** personal responsibility but trying to emphasize how sin's lingering effects still swayed him though he desired to carry out the Law of God.
- lean on your own strength => you fall => God picks you up tells you to rely on his strength by the Holy Spirit
- "The real him" doesn't want to do what his flesh wants to do
  - That's not who he is anymore
    - he has been given a new heart

> Discuss the possibility that Paul is embracing the Gnosticism or Greek dualism of his day.
> Explain its meaning and how Paul could apply this concept.

- **Gnosticism**: spirit (good), matter (bad)
  - Their practical conclusion from that is whatever done in the body even the most messed up sin is of no consequence because real life is in the spiritual realm
  - Also believe that they have a higher knowledge than others and have achieved a higher plane of existence (sounds like Scientology)
- That being said there is a hint of truth to dualism
  - Although the flesh is indeed sinful, we know that we will be given glorified bodies in heaven where there will be no more sin
  - We know there are amazing things in the spiritual realm but also a great spiritual war raging between good and evil beings
- Paul was not espousing Gnosticism or dualism because in the previous ch he says that salvation is a **free gift** of God
  - Not by attaining a higher plane of existence

### verse 23

> What is the "law in my members" warring against the "law of my mind"?
> Is Paul saying that the flesh and the mind are divided against each other?

- The way I took this question is what is the tension about between law of members and mind?
  - **law of mind**: rational thought or reason as it relates to doing God's Law capital L
  - **law of flesh**: propensity to sin
  - What I aspire to be as a child of God who loves Him & others is at war with my desire to love & please my self
  - It's a war of **pleasure**
  - The war is about pleasing self vs pleasing God
  - Those two things are mutually exclusive when they become the primary aim
  - I don't think this conflict will be resolved until we see God face to face and will be pure as He is pure
    - 1 Jn 3:2-3
  - Or put another way, his lower level nature to please self constantly battles with his higher level new nature
  - I am starting to see this picture of a born again believer, who delights in the Law of God, crying out for deliverance because he knows that left to himself he is stuck.
    - He can't do what he want's to do.
    - He recognizes though, that his **only hope is in Jesus** death on His behalf that can free his to live out his new nature
    - I keep going back to 1 Jn 3:3
      - "And everyone who thus hopes in him purifies himself as he is pure."

> As Jesus said before, how can a house divided against itself continue to stand? (Luke 11:17)

- Not sure how this relates

> Was Paul more sinful than we are?

- If it's a matter of comparing where I am right now in my walk to where he was as he was writing this letter then I would be the more sinful one no question.

### verse 24

> With what insight does Paul conclude the chapter?
> There may be more than one ... so mention what you see.

- Paul is saying that he is **desperately wicked** & **incapable of carrying out God's Law**, which if left unfixed, will lead to an eternal **death**.
  - In other words he is hopeless and his only hope for eternal life is Christ who can carry out the Law perfectly on his behalf.
  - It is also Christ who can **continually free him** to from his fleshly desires to sin to actually carry out the righteousness he so desires to do

> What does verse 24 have in common with Luke 5:8 and with Isaiah 6:5?

- Paul, Peter & Isaiah all recognize that God is supremely **holy**, that they are **wicked**, and that God does not abide with **unholiness**.

> How does this apply to your life and mine? Discuss.

- The one thing that has been impressed upon me is the need to rely upon Christ's strength & liberating power moment by moment

</article>

<article id="ch8">

## Chapter 8

> Explain the term "no condemnation" in verse 1.

- Paul progress his thoughts that he has been developing earlier
- Ro. 5:18 "_Therefore, as one trespass led to condemnation for all men, so one act of righteousness leads to justification and life for all men._"
- Ro. 7:6 "_But now we are released from the law, having died to that which held us captive, so that we serve in the new way of the Spirit and not in the old way of the written code._"
- **_No condemnation_**
  - or penalty from God's judgment because He is the one of _justifies & condemns_ (v. 3-34)
  - _Paraphrase_: We **will not be sentenced by the Judge** with the punishment we deserve for not upholding the Law
- An interesting practical thought developed by NAC, is that wallowing in guilt and not moving past it, is a form of trying to pay for our sentence which has already been fully paid for by Christ

> Is it possible for a true Christian to so offend God, after having being forgiven, that he loses his salvation?

- It brings me great **hope**, **quiets** my soul, and **humbles** me to know that God predestined me to salvation knowing who I would be before & after conversion
  - Knowing all the sin I would commit
  - Knowing all the times I would rebel
  - Knowing my innermost thoughts, desires & intentions
- And that He would hold me so tight knowing all that
  - so much so that nothing in all of creation could separate me from His love...even myself or my own sin
- This doesn't give me a **license to sin** but a **license to hope**
- Praise God that salvation rests on Christ's strength and not my own!

> What does it mean to be a "true Christian"?

- I guess you can take this question in a few directions
- The angle I approached it from was Galatians 5...fruit of the Spirit
  - If you have the **Spirit of God** residing in you, you are a true Christian
  - v 14 "_For all who are led by the Spirit of God are sons of God._"

> Discuss the possibilities of condemnation for future sin, using other Scripture.

- I know of no Scripture that speaks to eternal condemnation (_that is going to Hell_) for future sins
- The only one that I know of that comes close is a present sin which is blaspheming the Holy Spirit
  - And if you have the Holy Spirit residing in you, you cannot do that.

> The mention of the Spirit in chapter 8 far outweighs its reference in ch. 1-7. In what proportion?

- 1 to 20

> What does the presence of the Spirit accomplish in the life of a true believer?

- Reflecting on ch7, when Paul didn't rely on the Spirit, he did things he didn't want to do
- The Spirit brings
  - **life** & **peace** v6
  - **submits** to God's law v7
    - and therefore pleases God
  - empowers us to **put to death** the deeds of the body v13
  - gives us **hope** that our bodies will be redeemed v23
  - helps us in our **weakness** v26
  - Spirit **intercedes** for us in our prayers with groanings to deep for words according to God's will v27-28

> Why do you think that more Christians do not rely upon the Spirit?

- From my experience, the reasons I don't are:
  - kind of mystical
  - hard to understand the promptings of the Spirit
  - wondering if these are my thoughts or the Spirit's thoughts
  - Sometimes because of extreme charasmatics, we go to the other end of the spectrum, which is just understand God's word and do what it says

> What is missing? Discuss.

- I don't really here a lot about the Spirit in my circles
  - So at lack of knowledge

</article>
